Short Range Forecast Discussion
NWS Weather Prediction Center College Park MD
400 AM EDT Thu Jul 09 2026

Valid 12Z Thu Jul 09 2026 - 12Z Sat Jul 11 2026

...There is a Slight Risk (level 2/5) of severe thunderstorms over parts
of the Mid-Atlantic, Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi Valley, and
Northern/Central High Plains on Thursday...

...There is a Slight Risk (level 2/4) of excessive rainfall over parts of
the Mid-Atlantic/Central Appalachians, Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi
Valley/Great Lakes and Central High Plains on Thursday...

...There is a Slight Risk (level 2/4) of excessive rainfall over parts of
the Central Appalachians, Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi Valley on
Friday...

Across the Southeast, hot and humid conditions will persist and likely
intensify through midweek. Above-normal temperatures, high humidity, and
warm overnight lows will continue to increase the risk of heat-related
illnesses, especially for those without access to adequate cooling or
hydration. Temperatures will also remain above normal across portions of
the Southwest, Central/Northern Rockies, where Extreme Heat Watches are
posted across parts of eastern Montana, most of Utah, and western Colorado
starting on Friday. Furthermore, Excessive Heat Warnings remain in effect
across parts of Arizona, southern California, and southwestern Utah.

A front extending from the Great Lakes to the Central Plains and then
northwestward to the Northern High Plains will slowly sink south and
eastward to the Mid-Atlantic, to the Ohio Valley, and to the Central
Plains by Saturday morning. The boundary and upper-level energy will
produce showers and severe thunderstorms over the Mid-Atlantic, Ohio
Valley/Middle Mississippi Valley, and Northern/Central High Plains.
Therefore, the SPC has issued three areas of a Slight Risk (level 2/5) of
severe thunderstorms over parts of the Mid-Atlantic, Ohio Valley/Middle
Mississippi Valley, and Northern/Central High Plains through Friday
morning. The hazards associated with these thunderstorms are frequent
lightning and severe thunderstorm wind gusts over the Mid-Atlantic. While
frequent lightning and severe thunderstorm wind gusts, hail, and a few
tornadoes occurred over the Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi Valley. Also,
frequent lightning and severe thunderstorm wind gusts, hail will be over
parts of the Northern/Central High Plains.

Heavy rain associated with the showers and thunderstorms will produce
heavy rain over parts of the Mid-Atlantic Upper/Middle Mississippi Valley
to the Central Plains through Thursday morning. The WPC has issued three
areas of a Slight Risk (level 2/4) of excessive rainfall over parts of the
Mid-Atlantic/Central Appalachians, the Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi
Valley, and the Central Plains on Thursday. The associated heavy rain will
create mainly localized areas of flash flooding, with urban areas, roads,
small streams, and low-lying areas being the most vulnerable. In addition,
showers and thunderstorms will develop over parts of the over most of the
lower forty-eight states east of the Rockies.

On Friday, as the front sags southward, showers and thunderstorms will
develop over parts of the Central Appalachians /Ohio Valley/Middle
Mississippi Valley, producing heavy rain.  Therefore, the WPC has issued a
Slight Risk (level 2/4) of excessive rainfall over parts of the Central
Appalachians /Ohio Valley/Middle Mississippi Valley from Friday through
Saturday morning. The hazards associated with these thunderstorms are
frequent lightning, severe thunderstorm wind gusts, hail, and a few
tornadoes.

Elsewhere, an influx of moisture over the Southwest, the Great Basin, and
the Southern Rockies will trigger showers and thunderstorms from late
afternoon into the late evening on Thursday and Friday. Additionally, a
second front extending from the Northern Plains/Northern High Plains to
the Northern Intermountain Region will produce showers and thunderstorms
over the Northern Plains, Upper Midwest from Thursday through Friday.


